what is the fun Criterion my question
really is whenever you give this advice
of oh what should I do I you should
follow the fun it seems like you're
saying something epistemological instead
of just like this is David's life advice
yes well
um far be it from me to give life advice
that would be terrifying but the the fun
Criterion is epistemological yes
we'll start out by recognizing that
there are many more
kinds of ideas in the mind than sort of
are recognized in in everyday speech or
were recognized by traditional
philosophy
um
we don't just have for example beliefs
uh and and emotions we have a complex
menagerie of
of ideas in our mind which which
interact with each other and which are
all neces well many of them are
absolutely necessary for thinking and
for solving problems creating knowledge
in particular
the the categories three categories that
are very important are the explicit
ideas that is the ones that can be
expressed in a language ordinary
language like English
and then there are the inexplicit ideas
which can't be expressed in language uh
like for example
um when you're playing tennis and the
ball is heading towards you and you're
you're thinking oh it's going to go out
now no it isn't I better run for it that
kind of thing the words it's going to go
out now do not appear anywhere in your
mind while you're doing that and yet it
is knowledge that you're creating you're
creating a theory about where the ball
is going to strike then you're
correcting the theory and you're doing
all the things that error correcting
thinking does without expressing it in
sentences or words so that's inexplicit
thinking and you're using inexplicit
knowledge there's also un but it's
conscious
uh you you are conscious that something
is happening there and and if you were
asked afterwards
um what were you thinking then you might
say I thought it was going to land in
this place but it actually landed in
that place there's also unconscious
uh where in no sense are you
aware of
um thinking or knowledge there but it's
still going on but it's still going on
and it's necessary these categories are
approximate
um and one important thing is that that
um
explicit ideas always have a large
inexplicit component
my favorite example is grammar so we
speak according to the rules of grammar
but if you asked what they are you
either don't know them or you think you
know them and but and then somebody
tells you a sentence which meets your
credit your stated Criterion and you
know that it's wrong
so we have inexplicit ideas of
regulating our speech
our explicit speech if we want to
recognize that all these different kinds
of ideas and that's just only three of
the three major ones I mentioned if they
all
uh
contribute to the growth of knowledge
then we have to apply it if we're pop
hearings we have to apply the same
theory of knowledge to all of them for
example
none of them are ever Justified all of
them can be mistaken all of them we
expect generically to be mistaken
all of them are corrected by a process
of problem solving with with conjecture
and criticism well all that that sort of
thing
applies to all the different kinds of
knowledge and as I just said
they are all needed they all participate
actually in any uh significant kind of
thinking
when we have a problem when something
goes wrong
um
it may in general be and and we try to
identify what what the what the ideas
are that are conflicting with each other
that that constitute the problem
it may be that our the explicit theory
that that we uh recognize as part of the
problem one of the explicit theories
actually false
um like like we think um you know how
come it was so tiring to to go to the
Post Office well actually the poster you
think the post office nearby but that's
an illusion it's actually quite a long
way away so that would be example a rare
example maybe unrealistically rare of of
you having an explicit Theory they're
conflicted with another explicit Theory
and one of them was false and the other
one was true and you can realize that by
criticism
but more often there are more theories
than that involved more ideas than that
involved and some of them will be
inexplicit and some of them will be
unconscious now their theories and then
you corrected it to ideas is that
because people don't think of emotions
as theories yes there is no good
terminology that expresses this unified
concept of all the entities that are
interacting in a mind maybe because of
the history of how I came to these ideas
I I tend to call them theories in my own
mind but I think ideas is perhaps a more
a broader category for most people it's
more natural but there's also desires
and feelings so these ideas include
desires and feelings and and all sorts
of things that don't have names and and
so on it's just everything that can
affect one's thought processes
um whether you know about it or not and
and so on so it could be that that the
reason that you have this problem
um is not any of the
um explicit theories that you uh think
are part of it even if you
were perfectly accurate about what the
explicit theories in Conflict are the
problem May lie will in general include
actually uh inexplicit and unconscious
theories and there
the tactic of trying to criticize one of
them
is not really enough because you don't
know what it is
you you don't know what the inexplicit
theory is and if you do have an idea of
what it is you can't express it in
language therefore it's harder to
criticize if it's unconscious you
definitely don't know what it is
so um for example take the tennis
example you've seen puzzled by that in
in
where it's a matter of where would the
book will the ball land
you can kind of synthesize the what the
what your theory must have been you know
if you then
hit it wrong and you're analyzing
afterwards why did I hit it wrong well
because
I thought it wasn't spinning and it was
you know that so you've you've converted
your inexplicit ideas into explicit one
then you can criticize them but
but you might not you might be wrong
about what it was you you might be wrong
about what your inexplicit theory was
and even worse if it's unconscious then
you can't even conjecture like that if
it's if it's an unconscious theory about
things like
um
what it means to you to win and how
important it is to look good and that
kind of thing which are which are not
you're not consciously aware of but they
might be affecting you they might be
affecting your criteria
um then you don't know what they are and
that then it's absolutely impossible
well no it's not absolutely impossible
you can always think about it and work
out what it must have been just like
with the in explicit theories but it's
much harder shall we say and then you
have to exposing you're in a in a
situation where you
are faced with the decision
and you you want to make a decision even
if it's only a temporary decision what
shall I do and until I've solved this or
whatever
um then you have to find a way of
uh a Criterion for when there is a
conflict
uh when when it's too explicit theories
it's obvious or fairly obvious when
there is a conflict when there when it's
when it's an inexplicit Theory it's
harder when there's an unconscious
theory in conflict with explicit
theories or two unconscious theories or
five of them all in conflict with each
other
then
it affects you by
um via
I I don't think there's a there's a a
satisfactory word for it but it affects
you via your feelings it affects you via
your mood it affects you via things that
can't be easily stated in words but they
can be felt
so uh you you think you want to to uh
go down to the to the post office and
and your unconscious Theory knows very
well it's a long way away but your
conscious Theory uh thinks it's just
around the corner and you feel a
reluctance to go
and that reluctance is one of these
things it's it's a feeling it's a it's a
it's a mood it's it's
um now so there's a conflict
um
how do you know there's a conflict well
you you haven't moved you you but then
like so if you've got a bunch of
different unconscious theories and
inexplicit theories and they all said to
do different things perhaps yes what
determines which one wins that's where
the fun Criterion comes in because
uh you can imagine several different
kinds of criteria that one might use and
several uh very widespread criteria
several criteria are in common use and
they are
irrational or anti-rational
in in the poppers and my sense
respectively so a common Criterion
is
um to try to disregard
everything but your explicit theories
you you say for example uh this is
beginning to feel bad
um but
um I have worked out or my my
um my self-help book says or my my
exercise guide says or my trainer says
no pain no gain and so ignore the pain
of course I'm referring to psychological
pain ignore the psychological pain just
do the thing do the which thing which
always the thing designated by your
um explicit Theory according to that and
that's just a mechanical Criterion for
choosing between theories and therefore
is irrational
theories have to be judged by content
not by where they came from or uh any
attributes of theirs that aren't content
so another theory a kind of opposite of
that theory is what you might call the
Romantic stance
which is to say
explicit ideas are just
uh conventional decoration
they're not really human they don't
really mean anything what's really
important is feelings
and so what you do if you adopt that
idea is is you try to reach into your
feelings and follow them
now this course it's impossible uh I
mean so first of all it's irrational
because again it's just like the other
theory of following your explicit
theories it's just choosing between
theories according to an irrelevant
Criterion compulsory
um because
um it's it's
um it doesn't look at the content it
only looks at the type of theory
or the origin I mean choosing feelings
over yes something else just says oh
feelings are good and then it doesn't
look like what the feelings actually say
yes
so
um uh
so that is irrational for for for uh I
mean it's overtly irrational
um but there's also the problem just
like with explicit theories but more
more intense that uh you cannot actually
act on your feelings and unless you have
an idea of what they are
and you may be mistaken so you you don't
need an explicit idea about what they
are
uh you do because because you might have
a feeling that that
something is going wrong but that
doesn't tell you what to do
it because we don't need an explicit
theory of what to do you can just kind
of do without thinking in an explicit
way you can just kind of Follow Your
intuitions
you might need a conscious Theory but
you don't need an explicit one well you
need a conscious Theory But but so
supposing you you you're you're doing a
thing you're going to the post office
and suddenly a nameless dread comes over
you
so you might say okay well in that case
do whatever doesn't cause the nameless
dread well you don't know you might turn
around and start going back home and the
dread gets worse
you need a theory as soon as you are
instructing your legs to move in One
Direction rather another you have
uh well yes as soon as you've
deliberated
and caused your legs to do one thing
rather than other you have an explicit
Theory you can do deliberation by
intuition
okay well at the very least it's very
close to the borderline of explicit
because if someone asks you what have
you decided to do you'll say I've
decided to turn around
the point is you need some knowledge
you it's not enough to see that there's
a problem
because there's an infinite number of
things you might do when you feel the
nameless dread going to the post office
so that means that you've got to create
new knowledge in an area where where
inexplicit or unconscious theories are
conflicting with explicit ones you have
all sorts of theories are all sorts of
ideas which are in conflict in your mind
to solve this you need
conjecture criticism
um uh
error correction in order to solve the
problem and in in general you need to
create new knowledge
and
um how do you do that if you can't
translate the theories into the same
language into either the explicit the
inexplicit or the unconscious language
how do you do that
um
and and how do you know when you've done
it well you know when you've solved it
um because you no longer feel nameless
dread I mean you might not have solved
it completely but at least you've sold
the immediate problem so you you would
have to do some unconscious conjecture
and some inexplicit conjecture as well
as some explicit conjecture and the same
for criticism all of them
so how do you cross this this boundary
line between these areas of knowledge
that it is uh difficult or perhaps in
practice impossible at least in the time
to translate between
well I think the answer is and this is
going to be true even of purely explicit
uh the problems because they never are
purely explicit the answer is that that
uh
um at some level
all these processes are evolution
they're they're all a bunch of ideas
evolving in some environment and and
like in biology the environment consists
largely of other ideas but
in the mind in in genes there is only
one kind of idea which is the gene
and uh but with in the human mind there
are lots of different kinds of ideas and
they're not inter-translatable but they
are all evolving in the environment of
the others
and therefore what is happening when
things are going well is that there's
conjecture and criticism but the
conjecture and criticism in each of
these
um areas is taking account of what the
others are doing or at least what the
others are so just a simple example
um I'm not sure if I can think of all
six possibilities but but if you make
explicit criticisms of
of your explicit ideas you will have not
only the usual explicit criteria of does
this make sense does it seem to solve
the problem is it logically consistent
is it consistent with my other theories
and so on you you'll have all those
things but you will also have
do I still feel the nameless dread
um and so that's that's uh making
explicit whether whether you think
there's a problem you may be wrong as
always the nameless dread may may not be
any of the things you're thinking but
and the same is true at the inexplicit
and the unconscious level that they can
all take each other into account even if
they can't be directly
criticized by each other or translated
into each other or directly brought into
confrontation
the explicit ideas can be directly
brought into a confrontation by things
like logic and and by experiment
but uh in general ideas
are affect each other by Evolution so
you want to get ideally you want to get
into a state of mind where they're all
affecting each other and when they're
all affecting each other you are having
fun